There is a common misconception that if you rigorously keep your stuff organized, keep washing your hands, or plan your days to the last detail, you might be having OCD. OCD which stands for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder is a disorder in which people have recurring, unwanted thoughts, ideas, or sensations(obsessions) that make them crazy to do something repetitively(compulsions). In normal circumstances, this psychiatric condition (OCD) is frequently misunderstood by society and many other mental health experts. So here we go debunking some common myths about OCD:

Myth 1: OCD is all about cleanliness:

Sure, people suffering from OCD do often get engaged in excessive cleaning activities. However, it doesn’t mean that all people who wash or clean suffer from OCD, and not all OCD people feel the urge to clean.

Myth 2: Monotonous and ritualistic behaviors are symptoms of OCD:

Just because you have obsessive thoughts or perform compulsive behaviors does NOT mean that you have obsessive-compulsive disorder. The kinds of actions that people often associate with OCD, like excessive hand washing, or checking things repeatedly, may be examples of obsessive or compulsive tendencies that many of us exhibit from time to time. But the actual disorder is far rarer and can be quite crippling. People affected have little or no control over their obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviors, which tend to be time-consuming and interfere with work, school, or social life often causing significant distress. This set of diagnostic norms is what separates people suffering from OCD from those who may just be a bit more meticulous or hygiene obsessed than usual.

Myth 3: OCD patients don’t understand their irrational behavior:

Well many individuals with OCD understand the relationship between their obsessions and compulsions quite well. The reason they have OCD is that they’re unable to avoid these thoughts and actions which causes them distress and often leads to anxiety.

Myth 4: OCD is rooted in your childhood:

Many people mistakenly believe that people who exhibit signs of OCD grew up in dysfunctional homes or have poor self-esteem as a result. But in general, what has happened in your childhood has very little to do with having OCD when you grow up. However, researchers believe that genetics may play at least some part in OCD development.

Myth 5: OCD is a woman’s disease:

It may seem like more women than men would have an anxiety disorder like OCD, but according to the International OCD Foundation, OCD affects men, women, and children and of all ethnic, racial, and economic backgrounds at the same rate. While signs of OCD can start at any age, it’s typically seen between the ages of 10 and 12 or between late teens and early adulthood.

Myth 6: Bad parenting causes OCD:

Like most mental health conditions, OCD is a complex diagnosis with many potential causes. Research suggests OCD often has a strong genetic component. If a person has a parent or sibling with OCD, they are twice as likely to have OCD themselves. Environmental factors such as trauma can also contribute to obsessions and compulsions.

Typical parenting — even when it’s imperfect — does not cause OCD. Parents do not need to blame themselves for their child’s OCD. While typical parenting does not cause OCD, abuse might. People with a history of trauma and neglect are more likely to be diagnosed with OCD.

Myth 7: OCD only shows up in privileged people who have too much time or too few problems:

OCD exists amongst all cultures, classes, genders, and ethnicities across the world (although some symptoms are more common in different nations).

People with higher social classes may be more likely to be diagnosed with OCD. It is less because they are more likely to have OCD and more because they face fewer barriers to mental health care. People with fewer resources can experience more risk from potential stigma and thus avoid getting help.

Myth 8: It’s obvious when people have OCD:

Not all compulsions are visible. Mental compulsions include behaviors done within one’s mind. A person who seems distracted by others may be very focused on mental compulsions.

Even when a person’s compulsions are physical, others may not see them. People with OCD often feel ashamed of their symptoms. They may avoid doing compulsions in public, even if the delay causes intense anxiety.

Myth 9: People with OCD are dangerous:

People with OCD often have intrusive thoughts that appear seemingly without cause. Sometimes, these thoughts are about a forbidden act. For instance, a religious person may have intrusive thoughts about cussing inside a house of worship. Another person may worry about injuring a loved one.

People with OCD often feel guilt and shame for having these thoughts. Even if they have no intention of doing these actions, they may worry about “losing control.”

Yet people with OCD are no more likely than others to hurt people or commit crimes. In many cases, obsessions stem from a desire to protect others. Intrusive thoughts cause distress because they often go against deeply-held morals.

~Submitted and written for Aurora TLS by 
i_shrutzz
